README.md, before:

# kvault

**Personal knowledge base that runs inside Claude Code.**

kvault gives your coding agent persistent, structured memory. It runs as an MCP server inside Claude Code (or OpenAI Codex), using the subscription you already pay for. No extra API keys. No extra cost.

Your agent creates entities (people, projects, notes), deduplicates them with fuzzy matching, and keeps hierarchical summaries in sync — all through 20 MCP tools.

## Who is this for?

Developers using **Claude Code**, **OpenAI Codex**, **Cursor**, **VS Code + Copilot**, or any MCP-compatible tool who want their agent to remember things between sessions — contacts, projects, meeting notes, research — in a structured, searchable format.

## What makes it different?

| | kvault | [Anthropic memory server](https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code/tree/main/packages/memory) | [Notion AI](https://www.notion.so/product/ai) / [Mem.ai](https://mem.ai) | [obsidian-claude-pkm](https://github.com/4lph4-lab/obsidian-claude-pkm) |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Structure** | Hierarchical entities with dedup | Flat JSON | Rich docs, flat search | Obsidian vault |
| **Agent-native** | 20 MCP tools, built for agents | 4 tools, basic | Chat sidebar | Template, not runtime |
| **Cost** | $0 (uses existing subscription) | $0 | $12-20/mo extra | $0 |
| **Deduplication** | Fuzzy name + alias + email domain | None | None | Manual |
| **Summaries** | Auto-propagating hierarchy | None | AI-generated | Manual |

## Quickstart (60 seconds)

```bash
# 1. Install
pip install knowledgevault[mcp]

# 2. Create a knowledge base
kvault init my_kb --name "Your Name"

# 3. Verify it's clean
kvault check --kb-root my_kb
```

Add the MCP server to your AI tool's config:

**Claude Code** (`.claude/settings.json`):
```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "kvault": { "command": "kvault-mcp" }
  }
}
```

**OpenAI Codex** (`.codex/config.toml`):
```toml
[mcp_servers.kvault]
command = "kvault-mcp"
```

**Cursor** (`.cursor/mcp.json`):
```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "kvault": { "command": "kvault-mcp" }
  }
}
```

**VS Code + GitHub Copilot** (`.vscode/mcp.json`):
```json
{
  "servers": {
    "kvault": { "command": "kvault-mcp", "type": "stdio" }
  }
}
```

**Windsurf** (`~/.codeium/windsurf/mcp_config.json`):
```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "kvault": { "command": "kvault-mcp" }
  }
}
```

Then tell your agent: *"Initialize the knowledge base at ./my_kb"* — it will call `kvault_init` and you're up.

## What happens next

Every time your agent processes new information, it follows a 6-step workflow:

1. **Research** — Search index for existing entities (fuzzy name, alias, email domain matching)
2. **Decide** — Create, update, or skip based on match confidence
3. **Write** — Create/update entity with YAML frontmatter (`_summary.md`)
4. **Propagate** — Update all ancestor `_summary.md` files so summaries stay in sync
5. **Log** — Add entry to `journal/YYYY-MM/log.md`
6. **Rebuild** — Rebuild the search index

## What an entity looks like

Each entity is a directory with a single `_summary.md` file containing YAML frontmatter:

```markdown
---
created: 2026-02-06
updated: 2026-02-06
source: manual
aliases: [Sarah Chen, sarah@anthropic.com]
email: sarah@anthropic.com
relationship_type: colleague
---
# Sarah Chen

Research scientist at Anthropic working on causal discovery.

## Background
Met at NeurIPS 2025. Collaborator on interpretability project.

## Interactions
- 2026-02-06: Coffee meeting — discussed causal representation learning

## Follow-ups
- [ ] Share CJE paper draft
```

**Required frontmatter:** `source`, `aliases` (the MCP tools set `created`/`updated` automatically)

## What a knowledge base looks like

```
my_kb/
├── _summary.md                          # Root: executive overview
├── people/
│   ├── _summary.md                      # "12 contacts across 3 categories"
│   ├── family/
│   │   ├── _summary.md
│   │   └── mom/
│   │       └── _summary.md
│   ├── friends/
│   │   ├── _summary.md
│   │   └── alex_rivera/
│   │       └── _summary.md
│   └── contacts/
│       ├── _summary.md
│       ├── sarah_chen/
│       │   └── _summary.md
│       └── james_park/
│           └── _summary.md
├── projects/
│   ├── _summary.md
│   └── cje_paper/
│       └── _summary.md
├── journal/
│   └── 2026-02/
│       └── log.md
└── .kvault/
    ├── index.db                         # Entity search index
    └── logs.db                          # Observability
```

Every directory with a `_summary.md` is a node. Summaries at each level capture the semantic landscape of their children.

## MCP tools (20)

| Category | Tools |
|----------|-------|
| **Init** | `kvault_init`, `kvault_status` |
| **Index** | `kvault_search`, `kvault_find_by_alias`, `kvault_find_by_email_domain`, `kvault_rebuild_index` |
| **Entity** | `kvault_read_entity`, `kvault_write_entity`, `kvault_list_entities`, `kvault_delete_entity`, `kvault_move_entity` |
| **Summary** | `kvault_read_summary`, `kvault_write_summary`, `kvault_get_parent_summaries`, `kvault_propagate_all` |
| **Research** | `kvault_research` |
| **Workflow** | `kvault_log_phase`, `kvault_write_journal`, `kvault_validate_transition` |
| **Validation** | `kvault_validate_kb` |

## Python API

kvault also exposes a Python API for programmatic use:

```python
from pathlib import Path
from kvault import EntityIndex, SimpleStorage, EntityResearcher, ObservabilityLogger

# Initialize
kg_root = Path("my_kb")
index = EntityIndex(kg_root / ".kvault" / "index.db")
storage = SimpleStorage(kg_root)
researcher = EntityResearcher(index)

# Research existing entities
matches = researcher.research("Sarah Chen", email="sarah@anthropic.com")
action, target, confidence = researcher.suggest_action("Sarah Chen")

# Write entity
storage.create_entity("people/contacts/sarah_chen", {
    "created": "2026-02-06",
    "updated": "2026-02-06",
    "source": "manual",
    "aliases": ["Sarah Chen", "sarah@anthropic.com"],
}, summary="# Sarah Chen\n\nResearch scientist at Anthropic.")

# Update index
index.rebuild(kg_root)
```

## Integrity hook

Catch stale summaries before each prompt by adding to `.claude/settings.json`:

```json
{
  "hooks": {
    "UserPromptSubmit": [
      {
        "type": "command",
        "command": "kvault check --kb-root /absolute/path/to/my_kb"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Development

```bash
# Install dev dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Run tests
pytest

# Lint, format, type-check
ruff check . && black . && mypy .
```

## License

MIT

Commit message:

docs: move pip install to top of README for visibility

README.md, after:

# kvault

**Personal knowledge base that runs inside Claude Code.**

```bash
pip install knowledgevault[mcp]
```

kvault gives your coding agent persistent, structured memory. It runs as an MCP server inside Claude Code (or any MCP-compatible tool), using the subscription you already pay for. No extra API keys. No extra cost.

Your agent creates entities (people, projects, notes), deduplicates them with fuzzy matching, and keeps hierarchical summaries in sync — all through 20 MCP tools.

## Who is this for?

Developers using **Claude Code**, **OpenAI Codex**, **Cursor**, **VS Code + Copilot**, or any MCP-compatible tool who want their agent to remember things between sessions — contacts, projects, meeting notes, research — in a structured, searchable format.

## What makes it different?

| | kvault | [Anthropic memory server](https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code/tree/main/packages/memory) | [Notion AI](https://www.notion.so/product/ai) / [Mem.ai](https://mem.ai) | [obsidian-claude-pkm](https://github.com/4lph4-lab/obsidian-claude-pkm) |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Structure** | Hierarchical entities with dedup | Flat JSON | Rich docs, flat search | Obsidian vault |
| **Agent-native** | 20 MCP tools, built for agents | 4 tools, basic | Chat sidebar | Template, not runtime |
| **Cost** | $0 (uses existing subscription) | $0 | $12-20/mo extra | $0 |
| **Deduplication** | Fuzzy name + alias + email domain | None | None | Manual |
| **Summaries** | Auto-propagating hierarchy | None | AI-generated | Manual |

## Quickstart (60 seconds)

```bash
# 1. Install
pip install knowledgevault[mcp]

# 2. Create a knowledge base
kvault init my_kb --name "Your Name"

# 3. Verify it's clean
kvault check --kb-root my_kb
```

Add the MCP server to your AI tool's config:

**Claude Code** (`.claude/settings.json`):
```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "kvault": { "command": "kvault-mcp" }
  }
}
```

**OpenAI Codex** (`.codex/config.toml`):
```toml
[mcp_servers.kvault]
command = "kvault-mcp"
```

**Cursor** (`.cursor/mcp.json`):
```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "kvault": { "command": "kvault-mcp" }
  }
}
```

**VS Code + GitHub Copilot** (`.vscode/mcp.json`):
```json
{
  "servers": {
    "kvault": { "command": "kvault-mcp", "type": "stdio" }
  }
}
```

**Windsurf** (`~/.codeium/windsurf/mcp_config.json`):
```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "kvault": { "command": "kvault-mcp" }
  }
}
```

Then tell your agent: *"Initialize the knowledge base at ./my_kb"* — it will call `kvault_init` and you're up.

## What happens next

Every time your agent processes new information, it follows a 6-step workflow:

1. **Research** — Search index for existing entities (fuzzy name, alias, email domain matching)
2. **Decide** — Create, update, or skip based on match confidence
3. **Write** — Create/update entity with YAML frontmatter (`_summary.md`)
4. **Propagate** — Update all ancestor `_summary.md` files so summaries stay in sync
5. **Log** — Add entry to `journal/YYYY-MM/log.md`
6. **Rebuild** — Rebuild the search index

## What an entity looks like

Each entity is a directory with a single `_summary.md` file containing YAML frontmatter:

```markdown
---
created: 2026-02-06
updated: 2026-02-06
source: manual
aliases: [Sarah Chen, sarah@anthropic.com]
email: sarah@anthropic.com
relationship_type: colleague
---
# Sarah Chen

Research scientist at Anthropic working on causal discovery.

## Background
Met at NeurIPS 2025. Collaborator on interpretability project.

## Interactions
- 2026-02-06: Coffee meeting — discussed causal representation learning

## Follow-ups
- [ ] Share CJE paper draft
```

**Required frontmatter:** `source`, `aliases` (the MCP tools set `created`/`updated` automatically)

## What a knowledge base looks like

```
my_kb/
├── _summary.md                          # Root: executive overview
├── people/
│   ├── _summary.md                      # "12 contacts across 3 categories"
│   ├── family/
│   │   ├── _summary.md
│   │   └── mom/
│   │       └── _summary.md
│   ├── friends/
│   │   ├── _summary.md
│   │   └── alex_rivera/
│   │       └── _summary.md
│   └── contacts/
│       ├── _summary.md
│       ├── sarah_chen/
│       │   └── _summary.md
│       └── james_park/
│           └── _summary.md
├── projects/
│   ├── _summary.md
│   └── cje_paper/
│       └── _summary.md
├── journal/
│   └── 2026-02/
│       └── log.md
└── .kvault/
    ├── index.db                         # Entity search index
    └── logs.db                          # Observability
```

Every directory with a `_summary.md` is a node. Summaries at each level capture the semantic landscape of their children.

## MCP tools (20)

| Category | Tools |
|----------|-------|
| **Init** | `kvault_init`, `kvault_status` |
| **Index** | `kvault_search`, `kvault_find_by_alias`, `kvault_find_by_email_domain`, `kvault_rebuild_index` |
| **Entity** | `kvault_read_entity`, `kvault_write_entity`, `kvault_list_entities`, `kvault_delete_entity`, `kvault_move_entity` |
| **Summary** | `kvault_read_summary`, `kvault_write_summary`, `kvault_get_parent_summaries`, `kvault_propagate_all` |
| **Research** | `kvault_research` |
| **Workflow** | `kvault_log_phase`, `kvault_write_journal`, `kvault_validate_transition` |
| **Validation** | `kvault_validate_kb` |

## Python API

kvault also exposes a Python API for programmatic use:

```python
from pathlib import Path
from kvault import EntityIndex, SimpleStorage, EntityResearcher, ObservabilityLogger

# Initialize
kg_root = Path("my_kb")
index = EntityIndex(kg_root / ".kvault" / "index.db")
storage = SimpleStorage(kg_root)
researcher = EntityResearcher(index)

# Research existing entities
matches = researcher.research("Sarah Chen", email="sarah@anthropic.com")
action, target, confidence = researcher.suggest_action("Sarah Chen")

# Write entity
storage.create_entity("people/contacts/sarah_chen", {
    "created": "2026-02-06",
    "updated": "2026-02-06",
    "source": "manual",
    "aliases": ["Sarah Chen", "sarah@anthropic.com"],
}, summary="# Sarah Chen\n\nResearch scientist at Anthropic.")

# Update index
index.rebuild(kg_root)
```

## Integrity hook

Catch stale summaries before each prompt by adding to `.claude/settings.json`:

```json
{
  "hooks": {
    "UserPromptSubmit": [
      {
        "type": "command",
        "command": "kvault check --kb-root /absolute/path/to/my_kb"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Development

```bash
# Install dev dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Run tests
pytest

# Lint, format, type-check
ruff check . && black . && mypy .
```

## License

MIT
